Good morning, welcome to Introduction
to Swift and iOS app development.
My name is Maximiliano,
I can go by Max, straight on Twitter.
We are going to spend today creating
an app on iOS with Swift and
a framework known as Swift UI.
Actually, really really quickly,
I am a mobile web developer.
So I have been doing web
development since 1996 and
mobile app development since 2001.
That's of course before the iPhone.
So the iPhone appeared in 2007.
So was doing, when the iPhone
appeared I was doing mobile app, so
the time in other platforms.
So my experience in iOS
started actually the year
where the App Store and the SDK appear.
So I have published around 40 apps.
Most of these apps were actually for
clients.
I have a certain doing objective C,
that was actually the way to create
apps back in the original days.
It is still there, but
now we are going to focus on Swift.
So I have a start doing Swift, 2017.
SwiftUI, the framework that we are going
to, we working on today, a few years ago.
Actually, I have this is
the worship on IOS number 99.
Okay, from my experience, so I've been
doing this for a while as you can see.
So let's jump directly into the worship.
So we are going to be
covering the basics of Swift.
So Swift as a language,
then Xcode, that's the ID and
SwiftUI that's the framework that
we are going to be using today.
We're going to see how to test and
debug our app, the user interface, so
how user interface works with UI.
So we're going to create some screens,
we're going to create an actual app,
I will show you the app in a minute.
We are going to see how to navigate
between screens using different
techniques.
And for that we're going to be focusing
on iOS design pattern that may not
be the same on other
platforms such as Android.
So we're going to be focusing
on iOS app development today.
We're going to see how to work
with data with Swift and swiftUI.
So how data binding works.
Then we're going to
connect with Web Services.
And we're going to also
bridge to a web app.
In case you're a web developer, and
you wanna connect or you wanna merge
somehow a native app with your web app,
we're going to see how to do that.
So how do you bridge
Swift with JavaScript?
That's the goal.
So prerequisites, so
you need a Mac, and you need Xcode.
Unfortunately, we don't have a way
to create swift iOS applications on
other operating systems.
So actually you need to go and
download Xcode.
Xcode is a free application available
in the app store on your Mac.
So we have a Mac computer, you just
go to the App Store and search for
Xcode, it's free.
It takes a while, okay, to download and
also to install the app,
it takes actually a couple of minutes.
Also we have a companion or website that's
the URL firtmam.github.io/intro-swift.
There you will find some code
that I will be coding later and
also some links on assets that
I will show you in a minute.
Okay, I will show you this URL
a couple of times anyway, and so
no worries but if you wanna bookmark
that URL, that's a good idea.
So in terms of prerequisites
of your know how or
knowledge that I'm expecting you to know,
any programming language will work.
So if you have experience with JavaScript,
if you have experience with Java,
or Kotlin, that will be enough.
Okay, so you don't need to
have experience on IOS, or
in this specific language, Swift.
So if you've kept JavaScript basic
knowledge, that will be good enough.
So, this is worship for frontend masters.
So, let's look a little bit
about the frontend map today.
So if you're doing frontend, most of
the time, we're talking about the web,
but actually today, we have also
this idea of creating an ad client.
So sometimes we have a backend of course.
And then we have a website or
a PWA, a progressive web app,
and we have native clients, okay?
Today we're going to be focusing
on native clients, okay?
We are going to be creating
native clients, okay?
When you pick that kind of app
development, today you have two ways,
you can use official SDK or
you can use cross platform SDKs.
Cross-platform SDK are for
example, react native, flutter,
native script, summary, and so on.
Today we're going to be
focusing on the official SDKs.
From the official SDKs of course
every platform has its own toolkit,
language of course we will be
focusing on Apple platforms.
As you can see here I'm
not saying iOS yet,
because actually within the Apple world,
we have a lot of operating systems with
its own unique features and abilities.
And today we're going to
be focused on iOS, okay?
So iOS that's iPhone, and
a little bit of iPod Touch.
No one cares about that budget typically,
but it's also there, it's also using iOS.
However, what we're going to be building
will also be compatible with iPad OS,
because iOS and iPad OS are still
kind of the same platform.
But we're not going to spend
time because we don't have more
time to actually see specific
things about the iPad.
Or how to take advantage of some or
the largest screen or
actually some iPad specific situations,
okay?
But it's going to be compatible
with iPad that's how we mind that.
And inside iOS official,
Native Client develop Comment,
today, we can pick three
families of languages.
So objective C, Swift, or C, or C++.
So actually from the official ID's,
you can use any of these languages.
As you probably know, at this point,
because of the title of this course,
we will be focusing on Swift.
But Have in mind that when you
are creating a Swift application,
you can actually mix and match.
So you can actually have some parts of
your app written in Swift, and some parts
of your app written in C, C++, Objective C
or even something known as Objective C++.
It doesn't matter what
it is at this point.
But you can actually mix these.
And within Swift,
also we need to pick a UI framework.
So right now inside Apple official
SDKs platform, we can use UI kit,
let's say that's kind of
the classic UI kit frame work.
Then we have a Sprite kit that's more for
games, if you wanna create games or
kind of 2D or 3D experiences,
also there are more frameworks like AR
kit for a mental reality and so on.
And SwiftUI, SwiftUI is the new UI
framework available from Apple.
We are going to be focusing on SwiftUI,
okay?
So this is the new way to create apps,
of course you are UIKit
is still there, but
UIKit was created in 2008.
Yeah, it was modernized
some things over the years,
but it's still some kind
of fun old framework.
Okay, so on SwiftUI is brand new.
And if you're coming from web
frameworks such as react,
Angular Vue js, belty, and so
on, you will see familiar ideas.
So it's actually similar
to these web frameworks.
Okay, it's using reactive programming,
data binding and
the same idea of creating components and
things on the screen.
Okay, so you will feel at home there.
So this is what we're going
to be covering today.
Okay, so because we are covering already
using SwiftUI and Swift, actually.
What we are going to be covering is also
somehow compatible with all the Apple
platform because SwiftUI it's
actually multi platform.
We're not going to be
focusing on that today, but
how many mind that every single
we're going to see today.
Will also be,
let's say 90% compatible with watchOS for
the Apple Watch, tvOS for
the Apple TV, okay?
And macOS.
So you can re-use the same, let's say for
now components that we are going
to create on all the platforms.
But we are not going to
cover those differences or
how to compile the app for
those specific platforms, okay?
But the the experience that you will
get from today it's also useful for
the other Apple platforms, okay?
Do you have any questions at this point?
Yeah.
>> What would be a reason that would
draw someone to Objective C or C and
C++ family over Swift and
like why swift over those two things?
>> Okay, so I'm actually Objective C,
I'm not sure if you have
ever seen Objective C.
It's actually, is completely different to
any other language that you're used to.
Okay, unless you have experienced
with a small talk, okay?
It looks completely different.
So, Swift, we're going to see that during
the day but Swift is a modern language.
Let's say that it looks like
JavaScript if you want,
okay from that sort of point of view.
So it looks modern, it's not giving up
a lot of work, to actually make an app.
Objective C, for example,
just to give you a one quick sample.
In Objective C, you cannot concatenate
the strings with a plus sign.
Okay, so, just an example.
However, there are still a lot of apps
in Objective C, mostly those apps were
written like 10 years ago before Swift
appear, and they're still there.
Okay, you still need to
maintain those apps.
And I mean, the company didn't make the
decision to actually create the app again,
but because you can actually create
new parts of the app in Swift,
and actually call Objective C code.
You can continue using Objective C,
but in the past five years or so,
I think I've done only one or
two Objective C workshops.
So there are still some
companies using Objective C and
requesting Objective C developers,
but it's for only 5% or
less than 5% of the audience in
terms of iOS development, okay?
So, in terms of C and C++, most of
the time it's because you are using or
you have code that you are sharing
with Android or with Windows that is
also written in C, or you have some
libraries, within the company.
Now, you have some codex library,
decodex, or decoders or
some things around cryptographic
libraries they already written in C,
so you just use them, okay?
But to be honest if you're
doing an app what we typically
know is an app with a list and some some
screens, you're not gonna use C for that,
it's actually more complicated.
Because the UI frameworks
are actually not available from C.
So it's actually not
simpler by the way SwiftUI,
the UI framework that we're going to use.
It's only available from Swift.
UIKit, the other one, let's say
the classic one is available from
our Objective C and
Swift from both languages, okay?
You got a question?
>> In JavaScript we don't have a real OOP
concept, will it be a factor in this?
>> Okay, so
the question is around do we have real
OOP object oriented programming in Swift?
Actually, let's say that if you
compare it with JavaScript,
let's say it's closer to being
an real OOP language, but
it's also it's Swift nature,
it's also different than Java, C#.
And other OOP languages, I know it
similar if you ask the same on Python,
is Python a OOP language, and,
yeah, sometimes it's flexible.
So, let's say that swift also is flexible.
So you can do OOP.
By the way, we are going to see that and
today we are not going to do a lot of OOP,
you're going to see a SwiftUI is not
based on object oriented programming, so
we will focus on a different paradigm.
But you can do OOP if you want, but
have in mind that there is some
flexibility in the language,
that if you are an OOP, like a really fun,
you will find that flexibility
something annoying.
Okay, like you can mess with objects
that you don't own or things like that.
Okay, we will get there.